The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Yillian Way, by John Keith Laumer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Yillian Way

Author: John Keith Laumer

Release Date: June 9, 2007 [EBook #21782]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YILLIAN WAY ***




Produced by Robert Cicconetti, LN Yaddanapudi and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE YILLIAN WAY

By KEITH LAUMER

     The ceremonious protocol of the Yills was impressive,
     colorful--and, in the long run, deadly!


I

Jame Retief, vice-consul and third secretary in the Diplomatic Corps,
followed the senior members of the terrestrial mission across the tarmac
and into the gloom of the reception building. The gray-skinned Yill
guide who had met the arriving embassy at the foot of the ramp hurried
away. The councillor, two first secretaries and the senior attaches
gathered around the ambassador, their ornate uniforms bright in the vast
dun-colored room.

Ten minutes passed. Retief strolled across to the nearest door and
looked through the glass panel at the room beyond. Several dozen Yill
lounged in deep couches, sipping lavender drinks from slender glass
tubes. Black-tunicked servants moved about inconspicuously, offering
trays. A party of brightly-dressed Yill moved toward the entrance doors.
One of the party, a tall male, made to step before another, who raised a
hand languidly, fist clenched. The first Yill stepped back and placed
his hands on top of his head. Both Yill were smiling and chatting as
they passed through the doors.

Retief turned away to rejoin the Terrestrial delegation waiting beside a
mound of crates made of rough greenish wood stacked on the bare concrete
floor.

As Retief came up, Ambassador Spradley glanced at his finger watch and
spoke to the man beside him.

"Ben, are you quite certain our arrival time was made clear?"

Second Secretary Magnan nodded emphatically. "I stressed the point, Mr.
Ambassador. I communicated with Mr. T'Cai-Cai just before the lighter
broke orbit, and I specifically----"

"I hope you didn't appear truculent, Mr. Magnan," the ambassador said
sharply.

"No indeed, Mr. Ambassador. I merely----"

"You're sure there's no VIP room here?" The ambassador glanced around
the cavernous room. "Curious that not even chairs have been provided."

"If you'd care to sit on one of these crates----"

"Certainly not." The ambassador looked at his watch again and cleared
his throat.

"I may as well make use of these few moments to outline our approach for
the more junior members of the staff; it's vital that the entire mission
work in harmony in the presentation of the image. We Terrestrials are a
kindly, peace-loving race." The ambassador smiled in a kindly,
peace-loving way.

"We seek only a reasonable division of spheres of influence with the
Yill." He spread his hands, looking reasonable.

"We are a people of high culture, ethical, sincere." The smile was
replaced abruptly by pursed lips.

"We'll start by asking for the entire Sirenian System, and settle for
half. We'll establish a foothold on all the choicer worlds. And, with
shrewd handling, in a century we'll be in a position to assert a wider
claim."

The ambassador glanced around. "If there are no questions----"

       *       *       *       *       *

Retief stepped forward. "It's my understanding, Mr. Ambassador, that we
hold the prior claim to the Sirenian System. Did I understand your
Excellency to say that we're ready to concede half of it to the Yill
without a struggle?"

Ambassador Spradley looked up at Retief, blinking. The younger man
loomed over him. Beside him, Magnan cleared his throat in the silence.

"Vice-Consul Retief merely means----"

"I can interpret Mr. Retief's remark," the ambassador snapped. He
assumed a fatherly expression.

"Young man, you're new to the Service. You haven't yet learned the team
play, the give-and-take of diplomacy. I shall expect you to observe
closely the work of the experienced negotiators of the mission. You must
learn the importance of subtlety."

"Mr. Ambassador," Magnan said, "I think the reception committee is
arriving." He pointed. Half a dozen tall, short-necked Yill were
entering through a side door. The leading Yill hesitated as another
stepped in his path. He raised a fist, and the other moved aside,
touching the top of his head perfunctorily with both hands. The group
started across the room toward the Terrestrials. Retief watched as a
slender alien came forward and spoke passable Terran in a reedy voice.

"I am P'Toi. Come this way...." He turned, and the group moved toward
the door, the ambassador leading. As he reached for the door, the
interpreter darted ahead and shouldered him aside. The other Yill
stopped, waiting.

The ambassador almost glared, then remembered the image. He smiled and
beckoned the Yill ahead. They milled uncertainly, muttering in the
native tongue, then passed through the door.

The Terran party followed.

"---- give a great deal to know what they're saying," Retief overheard
as he came up.

"Our interpreter has forged to the van," the ambassador said. "I can
only assume he'll appear when needed."

"A pity we have to rely on a native interpreter," someone said.

"Had I known we'd meet this rather uncouth reception," the ambassador
said stiffly, "I would have audited the language personally, of course,
during the voyage out."

"Oh, no criticism intended, of course, Mr. Ambassador."

"Heavens," Magnan put in. "Who would have thought----"

Retief moved up behind the ambassador.

"Mr. Ambassador," he said, "I----"

"Later, young man," the ambassador snapped. He beckoned to the first
councillor, and the two moved off, heads together.

Outside, a bluish sun gleamed in a dark sky. Retief watched his breath
form a frosty cloud in the chill air. A broad doughnut-wheeled vehicle
was drawn up to the platform. The Yill gestured the Terran party to the
gaping door at the rear, then stood back, waiting.

Retief looked curiously at the gray-painted van. The legend written on
its side in alien symbols seemed to read "egg nog."

       *       *       *       *       *

The ambassador entered the vehicle, the other Terrestrials following. It
was as bare of seats as the Terminal building. What appeared to be a
defunct electronic chassis lay in the center of the floor.

Retief glanced back. The Yill were talking excitedly. None of them
entered the car. The door was closed, and the Terrans braced themselves
under the low roof as the engine started up with a whine of worn
turbos.

The van moved off.

It was an uncomfortable ride. Retief put out an arm as the vehicle
rounded a corner, just catching the ambassador as he staggered,
off-balance. The ambassador glared at him, settled his heavy tri-corner
hat and stood stiffly until the car lurched again.

Retief stooped, attempting to see out through the single dusty window.
They seemed to be in a wide street lined with low buildings.

They passed through a massive gate, up a ramp, and stopped. The door
opened. Retief looked out at a blank gray facade, broken by tiny windows
at irregular intervals. A scarlet vehicle was drawn up ahead, the Yill
reception committee emerging from it. Through its wide windows Retief
saw rich upholstery and caught a glimpse of glasses clamped to a tiny
bar.

P'Toi, the Yill interpreter, came forward, gestured to a small door.
Magnan opened it, waiting for the ambassador.

As he stepped to it, a Yill thrust himself ahead and hesitated.
Ambassador Spradley drew himself up, glaring. Then he twisted his mouth
into a frozen smile and stepped aside.

The Yill looked at each other then filed through the door.

Retief was the last to enter. As he stepped inside, a black-clad servant
slipped past him, pulled the lid from a large box by the door and
dropped in a paper tray heaped with refuse. There were alien symbols in
flaking paint on the box. They seemed, Retief noticed, to spell "egg
nog."


II

The shrill pipes and whining reeds had been warming up for an hour when
Retief emerged from his cubicle and descended the stairs to the banquet
hall.

Standing by the open doors, he lit a slender cigar and watched through
narrowed eyes as obsequious servants in black flitted along the low wide
corridor, carrying laden trays into the broad room, arranging settings
on a great four-sided table forming a hollow square that almost filled
the room. Rich brocades were spread across the center of the side
nearest the door, flanked by heavily decorated white cloths. Beyond,
plain white extended to the far side, where metal dishes were arranged
on the bare table top.

A richly dressed Yill approached, stepped aside to allow a servant to
pass and entered the room.

Retief turned at the sound of Terran voices behind him. The ambassador
came up, trailed by two diplomats. He glanced at Retief, adjusted his
ruff and looked into the banquet hall.

"Apparently we're to be kept waiting again," he muttered. "After having
been informed at the outset that the Yill have no intention of yielding
an inch, one almost wonders...."

"Mr. Ambassador," Retief said. "Have you noticed----"

"However," Ambassador Spradley said, eyeing Retief, "a seasoned
diplomatist must take these little snubs in stride. In the end---- Ah,
there, Magnan." He turned away, talking.

Somewhere a gong clanged.

In a moment, the corridor was filled with chattering Yill who moved past
the group of Terrestrials into the banquet hall. P'Toi, the Yill
interpreter, came up and raised a hand.

"Waitt heere...."

More Yill filed into the dining room to take their places. A pair of
helmeted guards approached, waving the Terrestrials back. An immense
gray-jowled Yill waddled to the doors and passed through, followed by
more guards.

"The Chief of State," Retief heard Magnan say. "The Admirable
F'Kau-Kau-Kau."

"I have yet to present my credentials," Ambassador Spradley said. "One
expects some latitude in the observances of protocol, but I confess...."
He wagged his head.

The Yill interpreter spoke up.

"You now whill lhie on yourr intesstinss, and creep to fesstive board
there." He pointed across the room.

"Intestines?" Ambassador Spradley looked about wildly.

"Mr. P'Toi means our stomachs, I wouldn't wonder," Magnan said. "He just
wants us to lie down and crawl to our seats, Mr. Ambassador."

"What the devil are you grinning at, you idiot?" the ambassador snapped.

       *       *       *       *       *

Magnan's face fell.

Spradley glanced down at the medals across his paunch.

"This is.... I've never...."

"Homage to godss," the interpreter said.

"Oh. Oh, religion," someone said.

"Well, if it's a matter of religious beliefs...." The ambassador looked
dubiously around.

"Golly, it's only a couple of hundred feet," Magnan offered.

Retief stepped up to P'Toi.

"His Excellency the Terrestrial Ambassador will not crawl," he said
clearly.


