The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Yillian Way, by John Keith Laumer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Yillian Way

Author: John Keith Laumer

Release Date: June 9, 2007 [EBook #21782]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YILLIAN WAY ***




Produced by Robert Cicconetti, LN Yaddanapudi and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE YILLIAN WAY

By KEITH LAUMER

     The ceremonious protocol of the Yills was impressive,
     colorful--and, in the long run, deadly!


I

Jame Retief, vice-consul and third secretary in the Diplomatic Corps,
followed the senior members of the terrestrial mission across the tarmac
and into the gloom of the reception building. The gray-skinned Yill
guide who had met the arriving embassy at the foot of the ramp hurried
away. The councillor, two first secretaries and the senior attaches
gathered around the ambassador, their ornate uniforms bright in the vast
dun-colored room.

Ten minutes passed. Retief strolled across to the nearest door and
looked through the glass panel at the room beyond. Several dozen Yill
lounged in deep couches, sipping lavender drinks from slender glass
tubes. Black-tunicked servants moved about inconspicuously, offering
trays. A party of brightly-dressed Yill moved toward the entrance doors.
One of the party, a tall male, made to step before another, who raised a
hand languidly, fist clenched. The first Yill stepped back and placed
his hands on top of his head. Both Yill were smiling and chatting as
they passed through the doors.

Retief turned away to rejoin the Terrestrial delegation waiting beside a
mound of crates made of rough greenish wood stacked on the bare concrete
floor.

As Retief came up, Ambassador Spradley glanced at his finger watch and
spoke to the man beside him.

"Ben, are you quite certain our arrival time was made clear?"

Second Secretary Magnan nodded emphatically. "I stressed the point, Mr.
Ambassador. I communicated with Mr. T'Cai-Cai just before the lighter
broke orbit, and I specifically----"

"I hope you didn't appear truculent, Mr. Magnan," the ambassador said
sharply.

"No indeed, Mr. Ambassador. I merely----"

"You're sure there's no VIP room here?" The ambassador glanced around
the cavernous room. "Curious that not even chairs have been provided."

"If you'd care to sit on one of these crates----"

"Certainly not." The ambassador looked at his watch again and cleared
his throat.

"I may as well make use of these few moments to outline our approach for
the more junior members of the staff; it's vital that the entire mission
work in harmony in the presentation of the image. We Terrestrials are a
kindly, peace-loving race." The ambassador smiled in a kindly,
peace-loving way.

"We seek only a reasonable division of spheres of influence with the
Yill." He spread his hands, looking reasonable.

"We are a people of high culture, ethical, sincere." The smile was
replaced abruptly by pursed lips.

"We'll start by asking for the entire Sirenian System, and settle for
half. We'll establish a foothold on all the choicer worlds. And, with
shrewd handling, in a century we'll be in a position to assert a wider
claim."

The ambassador glanced around. "If there are no questions----"

       *       *       *       *       *

Retief stepped forward. "It's my understanding, Mr. Ambassador, that we
hold the prior claim to the Sirenian System. Did I understand your
Excellency to say that we're ready to concede half of it to the Yill
without a struggle?"

Ambassador Spradley looked up at Retief, blinking. The younger man
loomed over him. Beside him, Magnan cleared his throat in the silence.

"Vice-Consul Retief merely means----"

"I can interpret Mr. Retief's remark," the ambassador snapped. He
assumed a fatherly expression.

"Young man, you're new to the Service. You haven't yet learned the team
play, the give-and-take of diplomacy. I shall expect you to observe
closely the work of the experienced negotiators of the mission. You must
learn the importance of subtlety."

"Mr. Ambassador," Magnan said, "I think the reception committee is
arriving." He pointed. Half a dozen tall, short-necked Yill were
entering through a side door. The leading Yill hesitated as another
stepped in his path. He raised a fist, and the other moved aside,
touching the top of his head perfunctorily with both hands. The group
started across the room toward the Terrestrials. Retief watched as a
slender alien came forward and spoke passable Terran in a reedy voice.

"I am P'Toi. Come this way...." He turned, and the group moved toward
the door, the ambassador leading. As he reached for the door, the
interpreter darted ahead and shouldered him aside. The other Yill
stopped, waiting.

The ambassador almost glared, then remembered the image. He smiled and
beckoned the Yill ahead. They milled uncertainly, muttering in the
native tongue, then passed through the door.

The Terran party followed.

"---- give a great deal to know what they're saying," Retief overheard
as he came up.

"Our interpreter has forged to the van," the ambassador said. "I can
only assume he'll appear when needed."

"A pity we have to rely on a native interpreter," someone said.

